eSports : The rise of competitive video gaming. 

This might seem like a ridiculous topic but wait till you see what the “Virtual athletes” make later through the read. eSports might look like wasted effort to the ordinary person but on the contrary it is a very rewarding and captivating experience at the same time. Well how did it come up and who plays It? To answer these questions I say eSports is the the byproduct of competitiveness in humans and the rise of technology around us. Even in the early days where we used to play on arcade machines we would challenge our friends to beat the high scores. This snowballed into larger well organized events like tournaments. By the time the 1990s came around, tournaments for arcade and console games had become increasingly common, with companies like Nintendo and Blockbuster sponsoring worldwide championships. Now who participates in these championships? There is a large population of people who assume that the players here are just the average geek or nerd who detest physical strain and would rather play from their parents’ basement. Which was true for the early days but seems to be taking a shift in course in the early 2000’s. Studies have found that gamers are more social than non-gamers and are also more adept at multi-tasking. The players are called competitive Esport athletes. Athletes?! Really? This thought might have crossed your mind I am sure,it has also sparked a large amount of controversy. Some of you might consider this to be a stretch of the term but take these points to mind, the players here go through rigorous mental and physical training to be at the top of their game over hundreds of other players who most likely are going through the same training as well. We see new medication in the market which is currently a booming industry purely for gamers, known as nootropics which is essentially a biohack for the brain which makes it function better and faster just to increase the response time of a gamer by a few milliseconds. Yes milliseconds matter in video games. Before you jump up and say no drugs are bad we can reference this to how gatorade and protein drinks are used by athletes is similar to this. Providing this cognitive edge is taken advantage by many companies like nootrobox which have even started to sponsor eSports teams. There were also studies by scientists at the German Sports University that showed that esport professionals go through the same physical strains that of a normal athlete. Now we dive into the numbers. No no not the boring kind. It’s all about the money here. eSports is a global industry as of now with a predicted revenue of 1.1 billion us dollars in 2019. That’s 2 years away. eSports is a compilation of many games such as Dota2, League Of Legends, Counter Strike, Call Of Duty, World Of Warcraft (yeah the one from big bang theory ) and due to the boom of the smart phone industry there are games designed for them as well. Vainglory which very recently held its 2016 world championships had a total prize pool of $120,000. As we can see this market is large and growing at a fast rate and player here have the opportunity to make it big. Take for example “The International” which is a five day Defense of the Ancients 2 (Dota 2) championship tournament. With up to 90 players from 22 countries, it’s dwarfed by the Olympics in every respect save one: the prize money. The 16 teams competing will share in a prize pool of over $20 million. The eventual champions will pocket almost $9 million split between the team of five players, and even the lowest-placing teams will still take home $101,400 in consolation prize money. $100,000 is roughly 68 Lakh Indian rupees, yeah that just happened. This is with an average of 35 to 45 minutes per game. There are also instances where players make way more money than the average Olympian. You might be thinking where do I sign up? Easy money right? Think again. To get a basic sponsorship you'd need to be the best over 1000’s of players and this is only achieved through years of playing the games and dissecting the game mechanics. We ourselves have gamers in our college with 4000 hours in game play which is equivalent to 170 days in game!. It might look simple at first but the amount of time and effort taken in is enormous. We all have heard the saying “Choose a job you love and you will never have to work a day in your life.” This statement is never truer than in this situation. We can see that the world is moving away from the regular repeated course it used to follow. Doing what you love and getting paid for it is true capitalism is what I say. The market does have its pros and cons. eSports is not mainstream yet. It will when your (a) 70 years old neighbor will know about it or (b) when eSports games will be broadcasted on main TV properties (which may happen faster than you think). There is also the concern of certain health issues but on the other hand it is growing at a rapid pace and winning the prize money will get you going places. We still may debate on whether eSports is a legitimate sport or not but that is for a later time. Games are all around us now a days, young or old everyone plays it at some point in their lives. It is you who decides how it effects your life.

Steve Jerold
1MV14CS107

***

Kick out of limbo

Google, Linux, Facebook, Yahoo, Reddit, Dell…. or indigenous Snapdeal, Zomato, Ola………something common in these multi-million or billon dollar companies? Well, they were all founded by college students viz. when the founders were college students. The potential possessed by a student is unbeatable and the problems faced are incalculable. Solving these Gordian knots could lead to something big. Probably if Larry page wasn’t worried about the World Wide Web being slow, Google wouldn’t be born. The other day when I was scrolling through the pages of Quora, there was a question, “What are some good software engineering projects?” I was startled to see plenty of ideas. Some were due to dire needs for oneself, some for the society and some for all. But trust me there are so many. Try to build an app, software or a even a new language (there may be nerds out there, who knows!!). The worst is copying from seniors (or slight modification, whatever) or plying behind an Institute. Sometimes we have ideas but just feel too inferior to share it with friends or become too futuristic in thoughts and reckon that it’s not good enough. There’s just one well known mantra for this; don’t tell. Our efficiency will be better if we keep it to ourselves and go for it. Seek for help if necessary, never hesitate. Ideas conceived in the brain have to be fed with hard work and nurtured with patience. “Limbo” refers to the small world we have created for ourselves or rather what an erudite would call, “comfort zone”. But living in this cocoon can never take us far. Just kick yourself out of it before it’s too late and the burden of regret starts to dawn upon you. Spare some time for yourself, sit in solitude and solemn silence and talk to yourself. Be the interviewer and the celebrity, answer to yourself. Let’s make the best out of our minuscule college life and achieve much more than just grades. After all even a little extra makes us extraordinary. There is a striking quotable quote, “Motivation can be provided but determination is solely one’s responsibility”. This article is just a small way to engender “motivation” to do something different, something big. PS: The title is just a poor adaptation of the movie I personally admire, “Inception”. 

Sahana B S
1MV  CS

***

The hour the internet stood still

Buckminster Fuller had once quoted “Humanity is acquiring all the right technology for all the wrong reasons.” With advance in computer technology, the evil in the field has also advanced. Internet was developed for the people to learn and communicate. Ever wondered what will happen if there was an Internet blackout? Sounds like a scene from Mr.Robot or The Die Hard Series or like a task in Watchdogs. Well, partial Internet blackout did happen. 2016 witnessed a large amount of record breaking cyber attacks which were fictions a few years back. So, what exactly happened? On October 21st 2016, a quarter of the Internet was taken down. This was an action of cyber attack on DNS provider named Dyn. This was no ordinary cyber attack as the biggest online services like Amazon.com, BBC, Electronic Arts, GitHub, Netflix, PlayStation Network, PayPal, Spotify, Starbucks, Twitter, Visa, Xbox Live and many others were the victims of this attack. This cyber attack has a generic name called Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS). In simple nontechnical terms assume an intersection of some roads where one road takes the traffic away from the intersection while other gets traffic towards this intersection. Computer Networks have a similar issue. When multiple devices or network send message to a single device, the receiving device is unable to process all the messages at the same time. This leads to jamming of the network. Such a network jam makes the specific service unavailable. This is DDoS. The DDoS that took place on Dyn was caused by a Trojan called Mirai. Mirai Mirai (Japanese meaning future) is a simple Trojan. The reason for specifying this Trojan is because of the record it created. 1 Tbps of traffic on the network of the victim was a world record traffic generated by Mirai. It exploits the basic ideas to generate an attack. Let’s not get into more technical details of Mirai. The simplicity and power of Mirai was what interested me. After reading about it on Kaspersky, Checkpoint and other tech related blogs, I was able to get hold of 6 strains of this Trojan. Going through the code, I did try to learn the working of the Trojan and analyse it. It targeted the Linux OS and IoT devices. Linux OS was converted to servers and IoT devices like webcams, CCTV, routers were made to report to the servers. Effected IoT devices also send messages to victims at same time. I too did try to use the server attack part of the code on my own system and try to find the other devices that were attack. This Trojan also showed me that however secure we think the computer is, there is still a drawback that can be exploited to create havoc. A famous dialog from Spiderman goes, “With great power comes great responsibility”, technology is powerful but use it responsibly. Don’t use technology to disrupt others’ work or other criminal ways. 

Mayank Metha
1MV14CS054

***

She (Poem)

She is my best advisor and my greatest critic. I have some of my best conversations with her, on my way to work, or while sipping chai on a dull evening. She is my teacher and guide, and provides me with some of the best of life lessons. She mocks me when I wear that dress which she thinks makes me look fat. She however gets me jum-ping with joy when she thinks I look good in it. She gives me guilt trips when I spend too much in shopping sales, but understands and encourages me when I need a retail therapy…and is reassuring when I splurge in those shopping sprees. She encourages me to be wild and crazy, to be adventurous, and experimental in life…while quietly reminding me about my responsibilities towards my family, and towards society on a whole. She also prevents me from going too far, so that I remain unharmed and have fun at the same time. She instils courage, belief and a relentless zeal in me. She pushes me towards being at my very best, and helps me discover a ray of hope every time I am on the verge of giving up. She accepts me as I am, with my flaws, my childishness. We often have arguments where I tell her how being selfish in the big, bad world has become a necessity, and she urges me to continue believing in magic, in the goodness buried in the hearts of people and to let go of all bitterness and hatred for others. She takes me to various places, when I read a novel, or watch a movie…and brings me back to reality when she believes I need to go about my daily chores. .She keeps me going no matter how weary some days seem to appear. She offers me a comforting shoulder when the world has turned it's back on me, and tells me it’s all going to be alright, when I need to hear it most. When the monotony of the week drains me out completely, she softly asks me to go on and dust that guitar under my bed, and strum a song.. She is my my constant companion, and the answer to all my confusions. She is the voice within me.

Swati Mishra
1MV15CS110

***

The fall of Yahoo

What does it take for one of the most popular search engines of all time, a multi billion dollar company to sink to a point of such sheer desperation that it had to be sold at a value far lesser than what it was once worth? Well, let's delve into that shall we? Yahoo! might not have earned the cult status that Google did, I mean, you'd never hear anyone say “Just Yahoo! it”, nonetheless, it was one of the biggest Internet companies in the world with nearly 650 million unique users visiting their website every month. Not too long ago, it overtook Google with a 79% profit on the revenue earned making it the highest among all Fortune 500 companies. Like all the game changing companies out there Yahoo also started as a time pass experiment for two Standford University students, (It's always one of them isn't it?) Jerry Yang and David Filo. In 1994 they created a website called “Jerry and David's guide to the world wide web” which was basically a directory that listed most of the websites on the Internet. After receiving a million hits they renamed the website to “Yahoo!” just because they liked the word and later decided it stood for “Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle”, you know, just so they could make sense of it. A few high profile acquisitions and skyrocketing of stocks later they realized they had struck gold. And so the glory days began. Then what went so horribly wrong? The epilogue for the long sad story of Yahoo! is finally being written. Most people blame it's “nice guy” founders. And that doesn't sell in our cut throat world. Unlike their competitors the duo took fewer risks. They passed up the offer to buy Google in 2002 (that's right!) and again Facebook in 2006. At the time these acquisitions looked like risky uneconomical moves. That’s the whole point. Web companies need the unique power of founders to do unpopular things. Larry Page advocated for Google to buy the money-losing video sharing site YouTube in 2006; Zuckerberg made what seemed like an outrageously overpriced bet on the photo sharing application Instagram in 2012. Well, we all know how they turned out! This is how tech companies survive—the ability to take risks. After Jerry Yang took over as CEO in 2007 he was either too nice or too unwilling to take risks. He could have let go of a great deal of employees and invested that money in technology and the smart phone revolution raging at the time. Although his biggest slip in decisions was probably when he declined a major lifeline; Microsoft made a bid to purchase Yahoo! for $45 billion in 2008 in an attempt to compete with Google. The founders believed that it was worth far more than what Microsoft was offering. Considering that they eventually sold to American telecommunications company Verizon for a mere $4.8 billion(Life, huh?), it's safe to say that, that was a pretty boneheaded move. But you can't really blame them either for having faith in the company they toiled so hard to build. So the inevitable happened and Yahoo!'s financial and stock values began to decline. In a final attempt to stop their plummet to rock bottom Yahoo! Hired Google executive Marrisa Mayer as CEO in 2012 to turn things around. After a 4 year reign she failed to do so. Experts say she could have made Yahoo! a real player in social media but decided to invest in sites like Tumblr and Flickr instead which produced no revenue, mostly because Yahoo! at this point couldn't produce an environment for startups to thrive. Many such unsuccessful moves later, everyone gave up on Mayer as well. And that's how it all ended the way it has and all we can do is mourn the loss and hope that Verizon is not too cruel. Fingers Crossed!

Alphy Elizabeth Joseph
1MV14CS013

***

To drive or not to drive

THEN 
It's already been over 3 years since people started hearing about self-driving cars. The concept of cars driving themselves seemed like something right out of a sci-fi movie. Then, people started thinking about how safe these cars would be. Think about it, would you trust a computer enough to drive you to places? This was a serious issue to be addressed by the manufacturer of the cars as well as well as legal authorities. Thus began the journey of rigorous testing and development of this technology. The first year of research that is, by 2015 we had cars which needed tech support within about 15 miles. Needless to say this wasn't very satisfactory. 

NOW 
Two years later the leaders in self driving cars are Google and General Motors. They have shown tremendous improvements since their first prototype with cars being able to drive themselves over 500 miles before needing tech support. Automotive Companies like Tesla, Nissan and Delphi are not far behind. Of course, all this is the testing phase; you don't need to worry about crashing into a car and having no one to shout at unless of course you're a regular visitor at Mountain View! These cars have the option of disengagements as well, which is a Manual mode of sorts which allows the car to be controlled remotely or from inside. These are needed in case of any software or hardware failures or maybe just because feel like driving. Also, control with a joystick isn’t completely implausible. You might need to brush up on your NFS skills a little! Google's fleet of these 'Self-Driving Smart Cars' drove over 630,000 miles with just 124 disengagements. Disengagements need not mean there was a failure; it just means that the company is trying out new tests. Tesla is already well established in making electric cars with complex AI's and is now using the real world information collected from their customers to improve their 'Autopilot' systems. 

ARE WE THERE YET? 
Unfortunately, the answer is no. We are still nowhere close to allowing these cars into crowded roads. But, looking at the pace with which this technology is improving, a vision of streets filled with driver-less cars is definitely a plausible future. Coming closer to home, these cars might be late to arrive in India for obvious reasons, but technology is surpassing all conventional barriers and it is an interesting idea that we may someday have driver-less Uber's and Ola's. The testing is only producing better results day by day and with the current brilliant minds that the world has, all that stands between this marvelous reality of an automatic and tech oriented world is time.

Shreyas N
1MV14CS130

***

